# Notes on the POLS 503 Spring 2014 


Some notes on the labs from Spring 2014. http://faculty.washington.edu/cadolph/index.php

## Lectures and Topics

### Topic 1: Introduction to 503 and to R / Matrix Algebra Review

Readings

- Gelman and Hill Ch 2
- Matrix Algebra handout
- Math Review handout
- Basic regression review: Fox Ch 2, 3

http://www.csss.washington.edu/MathCamp/Lectures/

### Topic 2: Assumptions and properties of the linear regresison model Part 1

#### Reading

- Zuur, Ch 1, 2, 3
- Fox Ch 5, 6 and skim 9

#### Lecture

- Challenger launch decision example

    - the importance of plotting data
	- do not select on the dependent variable

- Why R? Motivate the use of R
- Introduction to R

    - objects: vectors, lists, matrices, missing data, mathematical ops
	- Example: US Econ Growth vs. political party
	- Example: bivariate relationship btween fertility and women practicing contraception


### Topic 2: Matrix Algebra and R

- Work through matrix algebra review
- `det`, `solve`, `t`, `%*%`, `*`
- lists in R
- `lm`
- E.g. Iversen adn Soskice 2002, "Why do some democracies redistribute more than others?"
- Different types of graphics systems. Focus on base

    - vector vs. raster images

### Topic 3: Assumptions and properties of the linear regresison model Part 2

#### Reading

- Zuur, Ch 1, 2, 3
- Fox Ch 5, 6 and skim 9

#### Lecture

- Linear regression model in scalar form
- Random variables - systemic component and stochastic component
- Probability distributions - pdf , cdf
- Gaussian distribution: properties
- Recognize that different data and models imply different distributions
- Why do we use the normal distribution: because CLT applies to most estimators
- What is the CLT?
- Why do people use a normal distribution in political science? Appeal to a fuzzy meaning
- Review of simple linear regression
- Linear regression in matrix form
- Homogenous variance assumption
- How to solve for Linear Regression in Matrix Form
- What makes an estimator good?
    - What is bias?
	- What is variance? 
	- Efficient. Closest to truth on average. Mean squared error
- Consistency. Converges to the truth as the number of observations grows.
- Assumptions of OLS
    - No (perfect) collinearity, $rank(X) = k$, $k < n$
    - X is exogenous, $E(X \varepsilon) = 0$
    - Disturbances have mean 0, $E(\varepsilon) = 0$
    - No serial correlation, $E(\varepsilon_i \varepsilon_j) = 0, i \neq j$
    - Homoskedastic errors, $E(\varepsilon' \varepsilon) = \sigma^2 I$
    - Gaussian error distributions $\varepsilon \sim N(0, \sigma^2)$
- What is the Gauss Markov Theorem?
- R stuff
    - writing functions
	- probability distributions


### Topic 4: Statistical Inference / Interpretation of the Linear Model

- Zuur Ch 4, 6
- Gelman and Hill, Ch 3
- King, Tomz and Wittenberg (2000)
- Brambor, Clark and Golder (2005)

#### Lecture

- how certain are these estimates
- Our goal: Estimating unknowns and quantifying the uncertainty of those estimates
- e.g. Differnce in GDP between two gropus
- uncertainty in difference of means
- area under the t-distribution
- Significance tests and confidence intervals

    - gives a bayesian interpretation of confidence intervals

- Significance tests
- Substantive and statistical significance


### Topic 5: Model Fitting and Data Transformation

- Gelman and Hill, Ch 4 and Optionally Ch 7
- Fox Ch 12, 13, 17.1-17.2

#### Lecture

- Specification - choice of X1, X2, ...
    - choice of X
	- substantive and statistical reasons
	- observational research large % involve specification
	- experimental is to avoid it
	
- omitted variable bias and specification

    - DGP, truth vs. methods
	- kitchen sink vs. Clarke
	- post-treatment

- tranformations of covariates

    - higher order polynomials
	- logarithm
	- logit

- e.g. life expectancy
- heteroskedasticity

    - Weighted least squared
	- robust standard error

- residual patterns that are misspecification
- Model fit

    - coefficient of determination
	- standard error of the regression
	- out of sample tests
	- cross-validation

### Topic 6: Outliers and Robust Regression

- Fox, Ch 11, 19
- Venables and Ripley, Ch 6.5

#### Lecture

- What is an outlier? example with an outlier
- Mahalanobis distance
- Convex hulls
- Leverage and the hat matrix
- Leverage, influence, discrepancy
- Influence plots
- *Very good* mental model with estimates and outliers
- Belgian phone call example
- M estimates: biweight, huber, 
- Influence functions
- Iteratively re-weighted least squares
- `MASS::rlm`
- Resistant regression: least median squares, least quantile squares, least trimmed squares
- MM regression- reistant + robust regression

### Topic 7: Introduction to Time Series Analysis

- Cowperthwait & Metcalfe,
- Fox Ch 16
- Gelman and Hill, Ch 8

### Topic 8: Panel Data Analysis

- Wooldridge Ch 10
- Beck and Katz 1995

### Topic 9: Introduction to Causal Inference

- Gelman and Hill, Ch 9
- Angrist and Pischke
- Woolridge, Ch 5

## Labs

### Lab 1

- introduce everyone
- install R
- learn basic math operators
- starting with R

    - assign values to variables using `<-`
    - reuse variables
    - create vectors with `c`, `:`, `rep`, and `seq`
    - extracting elements from a vector using `[`

- matrices

    - create a matrix
    - add, multiply, sum total and over rows and columns
    - extract elements from matrices
    - find the dimension of a matrix
    - combine vectors into a matrix

- lists
  
    - know that a list is a vector with an arbitrary number of variables
    - know that lists can be named
    - extract elements from a list using a position or name with `[`, `[[`, and `\$`

- what is the class of a variable? 
- how to clear all objects in memory using `rm(list = ls())`

#### Notes: 

- this needs to be made more applied. too programming heavy
- do not use `mode`, use class
- in list, distinction between `[` and `$`

### Lab 2

#### Objectives 

- introduction to data frames
- reading in datasets
- basic tools for plotting
- regression basics

#### Details

- read in csv files, stata files
- Find the information about a data frame using `names`, `dim`, `nrow`
- Use `str` for a quick summary
- print the first few rows using `head`, and last few rows using `tail`

#### Notes

- Never **EVER** use attach.
- Never change setwd()

### Lab 3: More Practice with regression and plotting

1. how to re-code varaibles in R
2. examples with loops
3. simulating regression results
4. simulating the monty hall problem
5. the birthday problem

Notes:

- replace recoding with `plyr::revalue`, or manually do it with a named vector
- replace loops and simulation with `dplyr::do`. Should probably do it with a for loop and then without it

### Lab 4: Useful things, largely loops and simulation

1. More useful tools

  - Draw from the normal and uniform distribution
  - Draw a simple random sample `sample`
  - `sort`
  - `which`
  - conditionals: `if`
  - for loop: `for`

2. Examples with loops

  - run simulations to summarize a regression model - calculate confidence intervals
  - run a regression on each year, or different groups

2. simulating the monty hall problem
3. the birthday problem

Notes

- always should have an application for each thing
- a lot of loops can be replaced by use of do for the applications here
- use bootstrap to introduce loops + functions

### Lab 5: More on models and interpretation, simulation in detail

1. prediction and interpretation with interaction terms

    - rossoil data
    - predict, interaction terms
    - plot output
    - interact two continuous values

2. Interpretaion with 1st difference

    - use simulation to calculate confidence intervals

3. Interaction terms with 1st difference plot

Notes

- don't use `wireframe`. 3d plots are bad

### Lab 6: Miscellaneous, tranformation and heteroskedasticity


### Lab 6+ LaTeX workshop

Do we need LaTex? Markdown + point to tutorials? 

### Lab 8: Intro to simcf / tile

Seems fine. Should maybe make optional

### Lab 9: Intro to apply() and plyr

Probably can get by without using plyr. Since most of them are working
with data frames, dplyr probably enough.


## Homeworks

### HW 1

1. Explore a data set
2. Solve some matrix algebra problems

I think the matrix algebra problems are grunt work.

### HW 2

1. Using the sprint data

   1. create X matrix. calculate linear reg form of regression
   2. lm to run a regression
   3. plot summarizing the regression
   4. predict

2. Project checkpoint

   - identify dv
   - distribution of the data
   - challenges for least squares regression

### HW 3

Simulations for

Moving beyond the Default simulation 

Uses a custom function `mcls.r`

1. heteroskedastic
2. AR(1)
3. create their own problem

### HW 4

1. Effect of measurement error on linear regression
2. Confidence intervals: Using sprint data

    - Confidence itnervals for regression
	- logit transformation

3. Model selection using the Ross oil data

    - linear regression. expected change in regime 1
	- studentized residuals
	- log or logit transformations of varaibles
	- M-estimator
	- robust and resistant estimator
	- how much substantive difference does the finding make

It includes a note on log bound and logit bound transformations.

### HW 5

*optional* It was a time series and panel example. Drop. Unless I use a TS example.

## Data sets

- rossoil data: http://staff.washington.edu/csjohns/503/rossoildata.csv Data from oss, Michael L. 2001. "Does oil hinder democracy?" World Politics. 53 (3): 325-361.  Used in labs and
- cross sectional data on industrial democracies: Torben Iversen and David Soskice, 2002, "Why do some democracies redistribute more than others?" Harvard University.
- sprinter data. Used in lab 4
- ANES data 2000: http://staff.washington.edu/csjohns/503/nes00a.csv Used in lab 7 and 8 for logit.
- Challenger space shuttle data
- US Economic growth. per cap GDP growth rate. party of the pesident. Topic 1 http://faculty.washington.edu/cadolph/503/gdpExample.r
- Cross-national data on fertility and percentage of women practicing contraception. Topic 1 http://faculty.washington.edu/cadolph/503/fertilityExample.r, http://faculty.washington.edu/cadolph/503/robeymore.csv From the **car** package, dataset `car::Robey`. Robey, B., Shea, M. A., Rutstein, O. and Morris, L. (1992) The reproductive revolution: New survey findings. Population Reports. Technical Report M-11.
- Sprinters data: Used in homeworks. Tatem et al, "Momentous sprint at the 2156 Olympics?", *Nature*, 2004.

